### 1 Static Choice

- Decision theory is concerned with how agents inside economic models choose among alternatives. The most popular theory is that the agent will choose the alternative with the highest utility. 
- The utility function is an as-if concept, and economists generally do not claim that it exists in any material sense. Some behavioral economists take a different approach and think of utility as actually experienced.
- The point of the theory is to impose a set of consistency conditions on observed choices expressed in terms of axioms. These axioms should be verifiable, although technical axioms are sometimes needed.
- An axiomatization exercise can be helpful because it breaks the model into a collection of distinct properties which can be discussed and evaluated separately.

Let $X$ be a set of alternatives that the agent is choosing between. Three helpful terms are: 

1. A choice function, mapping every nonempty subset of $X$ into a chosen element.
2. A preference relation, ranking each pair of items in $X$.
3. A utility function, mapping $X$ to $\mathbb{R}$.

A choice function is the most directly observable. A preference relation can be either stated or revealed. A utility function is useful for building tractable models.

For now, we assume that $X$ is finite.

The set of potential menus is denoted by $M\left(X\right)=\left.2^{X}\right\backslash \left\{ \emptyset\right\}$. 

A choice function maps $M\left(X\right)$ into $X$.

A preference $\succsim$ is a binary relation on $X$.

Typically, we're interested in the following properties: 

1. Completeness: $x \succsim y$ or $y \succsim x$ for all $x,y \in X$.
2. Transitivity: $x \succsim y$ and $y \succsim z$ implies $x \succsim z$ for all $x,y,z \in X$.
3. Antisymmetry: $x \succsim y$ and $y \succsim x$ implies $x=y$.
4. Weak order: complete + transitive.

The choice function induced by a preference relation is defined by 

$$c_{\succsim}\left(A\right)=x\iff x\in A,\forall y\in A:x\succsim y$$

This object is well-defined if $\succsim$ is complete, transitive, and antisymmetric.

Antisymmetry rules out indifference.

### Generating choice functions from preferences

We would like to know when for a given $c$ there exists a preference relation that generates it. 

One condition that is important is Sen's $\alpha$ (also called Arrow's IIA, Chernoff's condition, or the Contraction Property). It states that 

$$c\left(B\right)\in A\subset B\implies c\left(A\right)=c\left(B\right)$$

This condition can be viewed as saying that irrelevant alternatives are in fact irrelevant.

If $X$ is finite, a choice function can be viewed as generated by some antisymmetric weak order if and only if it satisfies Sen's $\alpha$.

The idea of the proof is as follows.

Assuming Sen's $\alpha$ holds for a choice function $c$, we can construct a binary preference relation by observing choices on sets of two elements. This is the so-called revealed preference relation.

Completeness is immediate and showing antisymmetry is a straightforward application of the definition of the preference relation. Transitivity can be shown by contradiction using Sen's $\alpha$.

Then, we need to show that the choice function generated by the preference function agrees with the original choice function. Again, this uses Sen's $\alpha$.

The other direction follows from the defintion of the generated choice function.

So far, we have assumed that there are no ties. The choice function becomes a correspondence to handle these cases.

A choice correspondence induced by a preference relation is defined as:

$$c_{\succsim}=\left\{ x\in A:x\succsim y\,\mathrm{for\,all}\,y\in A\right\} $$

We need two conditions to build a revealed preference theory as before. 

Sen's $\alpha$: $x\in A\subset B,x\in c\left(B\right)\implies x\in c\left(A\right)$

Sen's $\beta$: $x,y\in c\left(A\right),A\subset B,y\in c\left(B\right)\implies x\in c\left(B\right)$

The second condition can be interpreted as an "expansion" property. If two elements are chosen in a "small set", and one of these is chosen in a "larger set", the other must also be chosen.

 Combined, Sen's $\alpha$ and $\beta$ are equivalent to the Weak Axiom of Revealed Preferences, which says that 

 $$x,y\in A\cap B,x\in c\left(A\right),y\in c\left(B\right)\implies x\in c\left(B\right)$$

 This is also equivalent to Arrow's C4 condition:

 $$A\subset B,c\left(B\right)\cap A\neq\emptyset\implies c\left(A\right)=c\left(B\right)\cap A$$

Any of these three conditions ensure that a choice correspondence can be generated by a complete and transitive preference relation.

## Representing preferences with utility functions

A preference relation $\succsim$ is represented by $U$ if and only if for all $x,y \in X$, 

$$x \succsim y \iff U\left(x\right) \geq U\left(y\right)$$

The idea is that if a preference relation has a utility representation, we can understand it from the point of view of $\left(\mathbb{R},\geq\right)$.

A complete and transitive preference relation can be represented by some utility function.

Starting from the preference relation, the idea of the proof is to construct a utility function as the porbability that a randomly chosen element is weakly worse than a given element. 

We then show that this utility function actually represents the preference relation. 

The other direction is straightforward: exploit the order of $\mathbb{R}$.